[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hello and welcome.
I'm Jeffrey Mishlove.
Today we are going to explore
the province of the mind.
With me is Dr. John C
Lilly, a noted pioneer
of mystical states and states
of consciousness, and also
interspecies communication.
Dr. Lilly is a former researcher
with the National Institutes
of Health, the Maryland
Psychiatric Research Center,
he is the author
of some five books
on human-dolphin communication,
including "Lilly On Dolphins,"
"Man and the Dolphin,"
"The Mind of the Dolphin,"
"Communication With Dolphins."
He has written many books
on deep inner exploration,
including "The Deep Self,"
"The Center of the Cyclone,"
"The Diatic Cyclone,"
and "The Scientist."
And he's particularly
noted for programming
and meta-programming of
the human biocomputer.
In fact, he introduced
that term, the biocomputer,
into our language.
Welcome, John.
>> Thank you.
>> It's a real pleasure
to be with you.
I think it would be good to
start with your famous maxim
about what is true in
the province of the mind.
Could you begin by--
>> In the province of mind,
where one believes to be true,
either is true or becomes
true within certain limits.
These limits are to be
found experimentally
and experientially.
When so found, these
limits turn out
to be further beliefs
to be transcended.
In the province of mind
there are no limits.
However, in the
province of the body
there are definite limits
not to be transcended.
>> You've probably
devoted your whole life,
and certainly many decades
recently, to pushing, to see,
you know, what really
were the limits.
Going into new realities,
taking on the belief systems
of those realities,
and then coming back
to your basic working reality
and challenging those beliefs,
integrating those
beliefs with your own.
In your writings, you've
explored almost every state
of consciousness
I could imagine--
the various mystical
levels of Satori,
communication with
extraterrestrials,
other species.
You've established, probably,
a more significant mapping
of inner space than almost
any other modern person,
and I think we all owe a
great debt to you for that.
>> Don't get stuck with those.
I've abandoned all of them.
>> [LAUGHS]
>> It's impossible, because
the infinities are in the mind.
>> I think that's the
beauty of your work,
is that you keep moving
further and further,
further and further out.
In The Center of
the Cyclone, you
described that you had a
whole system, virtually,
a quantitative
system for mapping
states of consciousness.
And you talked about
one that I found
most fascinating, what you
call plus three, mega-Satori.
And in that state you
describe going so far
out of your body, even out
of the physical universe,
to the point of being
at the level of essence
in which the physical
universe is created.
>> Right.
>> That almost seemed to me
in reading that book like
an ultimate state
of consciousness.
But I know you wrote about
it some 15 years ago.
How does it look to you now?
>> Well, there's one
step beyond plus three.
That's plus one, but you're not
allowed to remember that once
you go into it.
You have union with God.
That's the true yoga.
And so you're non-human.
So there's no way you can
recount what happened.
You have no way of saying it.
It goes beyond language.
>> Yes.
>> All those states
are beyond language.
Language is a very poor
instrument to express them.
>> You've described in some of
your other writings language
as being a film, a thin film
that separates us from reality,
really.
As much as we try
to use language
to describe what we mean,
it really puts barriers up.
>> Well, there's one use
of language that's valid.
That's the injunctive use,
telling you how to do things.
The descriptive one's very poor.
And William James said it.
The other realities are
separate from this one,
but the film is the screen.
And I found this
screen is language.
So you have to
abandon it when you're
going to these other realities.
>> In addition to plus
one and plus three,
you've mapped out plus six.
That's a state of
consciousness, as I recall,
in which the mind can
travel to any point
in physical or
non-physical space.
>> But you maintain
your individuality.
>> That must be a basic
mode of a psychic explorer.
I gather, from reading
much of your work
that you've spent a great
deal of time, in plus six.
>> Right, and in plus 12.
Plus 12 is the blissful idiot.
You're in your body, right here,
now but everything is happy.
Gold dust particles in the
air, everything is good.
>> You can feel energy moving
in and out of the different
psychic centers of the body.
>> If a bird calls, you hear
it echoing through the galaxy.
But that's not
much use unless you
can get another blissful
idiot in the same space.
>> Many of the mystical
teachings warn against getting
stuck in some of
these realities.
>> Right.
I haven't been in any
of them since that time.
>> Well, you also refer to,
in your mapping of states,
I suppose, is plus 48, which
is sort of a perfectly neutral
state.
>> Right.
Plus 24 is the professional
state of any discipline
that you're involved in, where
you're lost in the discipline.
48 is where where
you're communicating
with everybody else.
And then there are
the minus state,
but I don't go into those.
>> But at one point you wrote
about the importance of going
into the minus states and
remaining perfectly aware,
being conscious in
those negative states.
Not trying to block
out the negativity.
And you describe that, as
I recall, as burning karma.
>> Yes.
And then there's a--
in The Center of
the Cyclone, there's
a chapter called A Guided Tour
of Hell, which was minus six.
And that was awful.
So I never had to
go back to that,
and I was never
frightened again.
I was totally
terrified in that one.
>> I suppose it's what the
Christian mystics sometimes
referred to as the
dark night of the soul.
>> Well, it was the
dark night in my soul.
>> Perhaps this is a necessary
part of everybody's journey,
is to go through the
epitome of terror.
>> Right.
And for instance, there's
an Iranian psychiatrist
and an American
psychiatrist that
put 100 patients in a
mental hospital in Iran,
through what they
feared most on ketamine.
And they all left the hospital.
Now, I tried the
same thing later,
after I read that, that
evening, I took 150 milligrams
of ketamine.
And suddenly, the Earth
Coincidence Control Office
removed my penis
and handed it to me.
I screamed in
terror, my wife Toni
came running in
from the bedroom.
And she said, it's
still attached.
So I shouted at the ceiling,
who's in charge up there,
a bunch of crazy kids?
The answer came back, well,
you had an unconscious fear,
so we put you through it.
Just the way the Iranian
psychiatrist did.
>> In the realm of the mind
and the province of the mind,
we can face all of our fears.
>> Well, you may not be able
to, but you should try it.
>> I often find in dreams--
I mean, the things that
would destroy the body,
in the realm of the mind, don't.
>> That's right.
The survival programs,
as I found out earlier
when doing neurophysiology,
are built into the brain.
The rewarding systems,
euphoric systems,
and the sexual systems, and then
the painful, punishing, anger,
and so on, systems
are all built in.
And then you realize that
the cerebral cortex has
many, many paths to these
systems and from these systems,
so you don't have to go
through these states.
>> Let's focus a little bit on
some of the terms you defined
a moment ago.
You mentioned ketamine.
What is ketamine?
>> Ketamine is the most commonly
used anesthetic for very young
children and old people.
And in the literature,
their emergence symptoms
are described, Emergence meaning
coming out of the anesthetic.
And some doctors don't like
those emergence symptoms rooms
so they won't use it but others
know what they are so they just
hold the hands of the patient
and help them come out.
It was the most commonly
used anesthetic in Vietnam.
Some places won't use it at all.
>> But basically what a strong
dose of ketamine will do is
make you unaware of your body.
>> Yes, it can.
>> Mm-hmm.
I don't like it anymore.
>> But it creates a state
where one can enter into inner
realities, free from the
attachments of the body.
>> ECCO told me to stop using it
and get back here and learn how
to be human.
>> Well, in your
book The Scientist,
you describe going through
a period of very intensive
explorations with vitamin K, as
you described it at that point,
to the extent that
people thought--
and it's not clear to me
whether you were or were not
addicted to the substance.
>> Well when one is doing
research on a substance,
one takes it so frequently
that outside observers can say
you're addicted, but that's
a very bad definition
of addiction.
>> I think in many ways, whether
you were or weren't, one has
to admire your willingness
to always push the frontiers
of our knowledge further.
And it's clear that that was
your motivation for the work
that you did.
>> Any good researcher is
obsessive and compulsive.
>> You also mentioned
the term ECCO.
What is ECCO?
>> E-C-C-O. In Italian
it means, this is it.
But it means to me, the Earth
Coincidence Control Office,
which is one of
God's field office.
And ECCO runs our lives,
though they won't admit it.
And if you're an ECCO agent,
you can be very, very careful
to use your best
intelligence in ECCO service,
and you realize there are no
discoveries, only revelations.
And that was a come down for the
scientists, me as a scientist.
>> Well, I've found in
my own work in the media
and in parapsychology
that I'm very much guided
by coincidences.
>> Right.
>> And I guess it's looking
to coincidences as signs along
the way that defines this
relationship with what
you've defined as ECCO.
>> Right.
The Earth Coincident
Control-- it's
coincidence control,
what they do.
And they say we control
the long term coincidences,
you control the short term
ones, and when you find out
how we do the long term
ones, you no longer
have to remain on Earth.
You don't have to return there.
>> It seems to me as if your
concept of ECCO is a way
of modeling, perhaps, a
mechanism behind what Jung has
defined as synchronicity.
>> That's right.
Jung define synchronicity,
only a good fashion,
in his introduction
to the I Ching.
He uses the term coincidences.
>> Meaningful coincidence.
>> Of course, coincidences,
or in your own construction,
your own language
construction, of the events.
So it's all a fake too.
As I said at the
beginning of my workshops,
everything I say here
is a lie, bullshit.
Because anything that you put
in words is not experience,
is not the experiment.
It's a representation,
a misrepresentation.
>> And yet here we are,
misrepresenting to each other,
in order that we can
learn from these lies.
>> Right.
Now if you use
language injunctively,
as a set of
directions, then it's
not as bad as it is otherwise.
>> So in other
words, for example,
when you talk about ECCO,
when you talk about, perhaps,
going into an inner reality
using a sensory isolation tank,
which is one of the other
technologies in which you
pioneered or--
>> 1954, I invented it.
>> Or using a number of
different molecules which can
be used for this purpose,
or mystical disciplines.
When one enters into
these realities,
each set of instructions carries
with it, usually, a belief
system.
>> Right.
>> And basically what you're
saying is that all of these
belief systems are wrong,
but one needs to entertain
or to hold the belief system
in order to follow through
the instructions.
>> That's right.
Our brains are so small,
that we have to do this.
>> So the belief system itself
becomes a tool that we work
with.
And then eventually,
we have to let go of.
>> Right.
>> And using these
belief systems,
you've been able to, in effect,
map out the inner terrain
of inner space in a manner which
has as rich and varied flora
and fauna and geography as one
would find on any continent.
Perhaps richer.
>> But if you take the
same kinds of trips,
you'll find a different
flora and fauna.
Different kinds.
>> Each time.
>> Yeah, right.
So in the province of the
mind, there are no limits.
>> And yet, if one pushes that
very, very far, I guess one--
no limits almost means
nothing, there's nothing there.
Limits is what defines things.
It's what creates form.
>> I haven't thought
of it that way.
Well, there are no limits
that you put on it previously,
and new limits may appear, which
define it an entirely new way,
which is much larger.
That's all that means.
>> I almost have
the sense, though,
that if there are no limits
in the province of the mind,
that we humans and other beings,
we create limits of our own
to make it interesting.
To make the game worth playing.
>> You can't live as a
human without limits.
And that's your body.
>> Yeah.
>> They're built
into your brain.
The pattern recognition systems
in your brain, for instance.
If one hallucinates,
say, on cocaine,
one sees a bush over there
as an old lady crying
with a shawl over her head,
and you walk over to the bush,
and somebody else looks at--
and they're on the cocaine,
looks at that same bush,
they'll see the old lady crying.
So this apparently is belief
pattern, recognition systems
that are built into
our brains, that
are given at birth, probably.
>> In other words, in
certain altered states
of consciousness, there
is an ability, I suppose,
to be telepathic.
To cognize the thoughts
directly of another person.
>> I think it's more than that.
It's-- the particularly noisy
pattern of the bush in striking
your brain is reorganized,
personified by the brain.
And all brains do
the same thing,
even if you're not
in mental telepathy,
telepathic communication.
Though you have all of it there.
Do you know about alternity?
>> Alternity, that's
a wonderful word.
No.
>> I experienced alternity very
dramatically when I came back
from Chile.
And I sat in Elizabeth
Campbell's living room
in Los Angeles in what
I called the prophet
meditation, sitting on
the floor, my spine ramrod
straight.
And suddenly a line of light
comes down through my spine,
and the leaves of different
realities all around me.
And I could look
into the future.
And the present is right
here, and each of those,
it goes on out to
many years from now.
It goes infinitely upwards.
And there's tremendous amount
of power going through this.
The next morning I
was thrown out of bed
by the Sylmar earthquake.
And I thought, gee,
did I cause that?
That was the same energy
that went through me.
And then I realized
that this was hubris.
He whom the gods would
destroy, they give hubris.
>> They first fill with pride.
>> And so I lost my pride
and I realized that I
couldn't explain either of them.
>> But alternity is, as
you've described it, then,
would seem to be a space in
which you're in touch with many
alternate realities--
>> Yeah.
>> --all simultaneously.
>> And then you get
caught with one, as I did.
>> It seems very
similar, in a way,
to what physicists are
describing when they talk about
the multiple universe
interpretation of quantum
physics.
>> That's right.
And Francis Jeffries
is writing my biography
and he describes
alternity from the wave
function of quantum mechanics.
And when you collapse it,
you've chosen one alternate.
>> You've referred several
times now to the fact that
in the province of the
body, there are limits.
And you yourself have
thrown yourself up
against those limits
on many occasions
and have written about it.
In your writing, you seem
to be warning people, maybe,
not to do everything
that you've done.
>> That's right.
They don't have to.
See this hand?
I have to keep it in
ointment because 11/11/87
I drove my car up a slide bank,
turned it over, and totaled it.
And this was the battery
acid burned this hand.
And these knuckles were
broken, and that's all.
If I'd had my seat belt on
I would've been decapitated.
But ECCO was showing
me something.
That I wasn't exploring
alternates properly.
I was caught with one.
>> There's a wonderful section
in your book The Scientist
in which you describe a
conversation amongst different
beings in an altered state, who
were describing how carefully
they worked to create all the
coincidences so that you could
have an accident in which
you nearly died and were
resuscitated by your wife
Toni, who had just learned
mouth-to-mouth resuscitation
three days earlier.
>> Right.
Then the other accident,
the one that closed off
vitamin K from me, where I was
on a 10 speed bicycle going
down Decker Canyon
Road, and the chain
caught and I hit the road.
Nine bones were broken.
What I didn't say
in The Scientist
is that I was on PCP at the
time, 42 milligrams injected.
So I was out in the hospital
for five days and five nights.
I was taken by ECCO
to planets that
were being destroyed
by supernova waves,
by atomic warfare, and so on.
It was incredible.
Then I try to come back here,
I come back, Toni'd be there,
I'd grab on to her and hold
on for six, seven hours,
then they'd take me back out.
I hadn't finished the lesson.
>> What do you
think the lesson is?
>> Well, the lesson in that case
was look up the dose for PCP
before you take it.
It's 2 milligrams, not 42.
>> [LAUGHS]
>> And the other
lessons, of course,
were I came back wanting
to put on radiation suits.
That this planet
is not very stable.
It can be destroyed any time.
>> There's a sense,
and, you know,
the way in which
you live your life,
right out on the very edge
of what would be called-
not just normalcy or the edge
of what is conventionally safe
to do, but the very edge of
what is physically possible
for a human being to do.
>> Exploring the
limits of the body.
>> Yes.
And that in so doing,
well, of course,
you've discovered that, like
the fool in the Tarot deck,
you put yourself into this
position of nascent wisdom
in which you're bound
to make mistakes.
One can't explore the way you
have without making mistakes.
And yet those very mistakes
seem to propel you even deeper.
>> I have a saying,
there are no mistakes,
there're only
correctable errors.
There are no errors, there're
only alternate programs.
And that is escape the guilt.
>> There is a sense in which--
you know, you've lived your life
so much in the internal reality
that I almost feel like, you
know, you being with me here
in the TV studio, it's
like you've come up
for air a little bit to
breathe together with us
and to share what it's like
in these vast, vast realms
light years away from
planetside reality.
>> I call that insanity, and
when we're talking together
we're in outsanity.
And you should never try to
express all of your insanity
in the outsanity or
they'll lock you up.
>> But in a way, you've
expressed more of your insanity
than most people
would ever dare to.
>> Well, a lot of
people take my work as--
my books as a permission
to go further with that.
>> One would almost think
that an entire generation,
perhaps several generations
of people now feel much freer
to describe their own inner
experiences because of people
like you doing it at a time
when it was much riskier.
>> I'm always surprised at
how many people read my books
and been influenced by them.
>> Well, I can certainly say
that that's the case for me.
>> I think you'll like the
new edition of The Scientist.
It has all the things I
left out of the first one.
75 new pages in, and
50 new photographs.
And I admit that it was
ketamine, not vitamin K.
>> But you're not using
ketamine currently.
>> No.
I don't like it anymore.
>> Are you still doing
work in sensory isolation?
>> Once in a while.
But I never talk about
what I'm doing currently.
Remember the human biocomputer?
>> Yes.
>> I was doing that work with
LSD in the tank in St. Thomas,
and the National Institute
of Mental Health,
in which I had a fellowship,
thought I was just working with
dolphins.
So when I sent them
human biocomputers,
the report for five years of
the fellowship, they wrote back,
we didn't realize
we were going to get
a monograph from this work.
>> [LAUGHS]
>> I don't think they read it.
>> And they cut off your
funding shortly thereafter,
didn't they?
>> Yes.
Somebody told the people
supporting the dolphin research
that I had brain
damage from LSD.
Well, I got that
rumor, so I took it
to the head of the
Mental Health Council
that was supporting the work.
And he was the head of
the Neurological Institute
in New York.
And he got angry
when I said that.
So he spent three
days examining me.
I've never had such a
thorough examination.
He got angrier and angrier.
He said, there's
absolutely no evidence.
He said, do you want
any more research money?
And I said no, I've quit that.
So he said, all right,
I'm going to fire
two people, one in the institute
and one in my committee.
So he did.
>> Well, I suppose
for our culture,
the really special thing about
you is the fact that you really
have a foot in both
worlds, the scientific camp
and the mystical camp.
And in a way, you seem
dissatisfied with both of them.
Neither camp seems to provide
an adequate enough model
of reality for you.
>> My own beliefs
are unbelievable.
>> And you seem to be saying
that it's up to each person
to, in effect, make the
same bridge that you have
and to create their own belief
system so that in creating that
belief, they can move into the
state that that belief leads
them to so that they can
then discard it again.
>> That's the gnostic
point of view,
self-transcendence not
transcendence through a church
or a group.
>> Back 15 years ago or so,
you were exploring the mystical
states is described classically
as the various levels
of samadhi, and your work
with Oscar Ichazo in Chile,
in the Arika School.
>> Right.
>> And you had achieved, as
we had described earlier,
some of the very highest states
of those mystical traditions.
And you wrote about them from
your own personal experience.
People in the
mystical traditions
view these states as
being ultimate states.
I get the sense
from you that you
don't think of them that way.
You think of them more the way
a scientist would look at tools.
>> [INAUDIBLE],, for
instance, 400 BC,
said when you reach the
highest form of samadhi,
you realize there are
hundreds more beyond that.
And I agree with all of it.
>> Well, John Lilly, it's been
a pleasure having you with me.
Thank you very much.
>> Thank you.
It's a pleasure being here.
You sure do know how to
ask the right questions.
>> And thank you very
much for being with us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]